I want to start off by telling a short
story of my time at the Islamic
University of Medina.
I remember
the teacher that was teaching us in
Sahih al-Bukhari.
Till this day, I don't know what his
name was. We used to refer to him as
al-fallah as in the the farmer. And the
reason we used to refer to him as this
is because every time he would walk into
the classroom he would have the like the
the the odor of like cow manure and like
goat you know droppings and stuff. And
then one day some of the students they
actually followed him back
and he actually had a pickup truck that
had goats. He brought goats to the
university in the back. Now, the
interesting thing about this teacher
that you know that was my motivation to
actually study Sahih al-Bukhari. I
thought to myself this teacher is
absolutely terrible. You know, he has no
idea how to teach. And that became my
motivation and my passion you know what
I need to study Sahih al-Bukhari by
myself and that's how I'm going to end
up learning about Sahih al-Bukhari.
Then we had a second teacher and he's
the second the teacher that I want to
focus on today in the light of Allah.
His name is Sheikh Abdurrahman
ar-Rushidan. Sheikh Abdurrahman
ar-Rushidan.
And Sheikh Abdurrahman ar-Rushidan for
those of you who are familiar with the
muhaddith of Medina Sheikh Abdul Muhsin
Abbad he has been the student that that
reads to Sheikh Abdul Muhsin Abbad every
day in his weekly in his daily halaqas.
So for like the last 15 years or last 20
years or so he's the one that's been
reading to him.
And till this day, I've never come
across a teacher like this. Subhan Allah
this teacher was so strict and so on
point it was like I couldn't exaggerate
it even if I wanted it to. So for
example, in class if your if your eyes
left the books or left looking at him he
would pick it up right away and he would
make you stand up and write like recite
in the isnad. He's like if you don't
recite the isnad, get out of my class. I
remember the day we used to have exams.
Uh we used to have our midterm exams.
The general norm is on the day of a
midterm exam, you will come to class,
you do your midterm exam and you leave.
With Sheikh Abdurrahman ar-Rushidan he
would teach you for the first half an
hour
you know, clog your mind with a whole
bunch of information and then he'd be
like "Khalas, we're doing your
we're doing your you know, midterm exam
right now."
I remember our final exam our final
exam.
Just to show you you know, the type of
personality he had.
His exam was extremely difficult. I
remember one of the questions he was
like remember
you know, mention what Ibn Hajar Allah
said about a particular narrator. And
his name was something like Muhammad bin
Muhammad where you have like a million
of them. It's impossible to figure out
who he's talking about unless you were
paying like immense detail detail to
what he's been talking about the whole
semester. And you know, students started
complaining he's like "Khalas, you know
what? I'm going to give you guys a bonus
question. I admit I've been harsh. I'll
give you guys a bonus question." He goes
"Mention the third word on page 19."
And the students are like how is this a
bonus question? This is even worse than
the original question. And then he would
just sit there and he would laugh at the
students. He would just sit there and
laugh at the students.
And you know it's not that he had was
ill-intentioned but he was a a very very
you know, unique personality. You know,
when you think about really clever
genius people socially awkward this was
sort of like who he was.
But till this day you know, there's
certain lessons that he taught me that
you know, if you were to ask me these
questions in my sleep I would be able to
answer those questions. And that is
because of how strict he was with his
students in terms of how much he made us
write in terms of you know, he would
keep us till the very second that class
was over. And he would never keep us a
second longer or a second shorter. He
would always end on time. He was one of
the few teachers that was almost never
absent. You know, I the whole semester
as in the whole year in Sannah Oola I
don't remember him being absent once.
And this is the type of person he was.
Now, the reason why I mentioned this the
reason why I mentioned this is because
one of the hadith that we had covered
with him in the
hadith class was this hadith that we're
discussing today in the light of Allah
and it brought back you know, a lot of
memories. And on top of that I was you
know, talking about Sheikh Abdurrahman
ar-Rushidan last night with with some
guests as well. So all those memories
came back and I wanted to share them
with you as well.
Now, this last point you know, that I
was mentioning that the way he used to
make us write like I want you to think
about Subhan Allah each and every single
syllable that came out of his mouth he
would force us to write it down. He was
like you never know what is going to
come on your final exam. Make sure you
write everything down.
And then when you look at the books of
the predecessors in terms of you know,
the adab or the adab of the talib al-ilm
they emphasize the exact same thing that
as a student of knowledge you're meant
to be writing everything down. Because
if you're not writing it down you do not
for sure know for sure if you're
retaining it or not. You do not know for
sure if you're retaining it or not. Now,
particularly with this hadith
you'll notice that we're discussing
something very very simple tonight.
We're discussing the five pillars of
Islam. This is something that you know,
the kids they probably studied in Sunday
school. And you know, you're like why
are we covering it today? But you'll
notice that
we're going to be going into detail
that requires a lot of writing down or
it requires you know, a memory like Imam
al-Bukhari
where you just like memorize everything.
So in the light of Allah if you have pen
and paper you know start writing down in
the light of Allah. So starting off with
the first hadith uh it mentions on the
authority of Abdullah ibn Umar ibn
al-Khattab
said
"I heard the messenger of Allah
say Islam has been built on five pillars
testifying there is no deity worthy of
worship except Allah and that Muhammad
is the messenger of Allah. Establishing
the zakat paying the zakat establishing
the salah paying the zakat making the
hajj to the house and fasting in
Ramadan." It was reported by both
al-Bukhari and by al-Muslim.
So the messenger of Allah
he starts off this hadith by giving an
example. And here the messenger of Allah
he continues continues to teach us the
importance of relating subject matters
to the people. So the messenger of Allah
when he mentions Islam
that Islam is built upon five pillars
this is an example that he's giving to
the people that they can easily relate
to. So in the past people would actually
just go and build their own houses. So
they would find a place that they like
if that place was vacant and you know,
accessible they would start building
their houses there. So they would know
this concept of building pillars. Now,
that is why the messenger of Allah
he starts off this hadith with this
clear example because everyone can
relate to the function of a pillar. You
know, in this building if you were to
take the pillars away then the building
would not stand. Similarly, here what
the messenger of Allah he is saying is
mentioning that Islam is built upon
these five pillars. You take these
pillars away and Islam will no longer
exist. Islam will no longer exist. Now,
here the messenger of Allah
as is usual he mentions these things in
a particular order due to their
importance and due to their
significance. So the one that is
mentioned first is the basis for all of
the the ones to come. Similarly, with
the second, the third, the fourth and
the fifth as well.
Now you'll notice that the messenger of
Allah
he starts off that the first pillar of
Islam is the statement of
the statement of
it is the statement of that there's no
one worthy of worship except Allah and
that Muhammad
is his messenger is his messenger and
prophet. So now let us firstly start off
by emphasizing the statement itself. As
you can see the statement is broken down
into two components. Component number
one where the messenger of Allah
teaches us there is no god but Allah
there is no god but Allah. Now, this
component within of itself is also
broken down into two components. That is
the negation of there is no god except
for Allah. So the first is there is no
god and then the affirmation comes with
except for Allah.
Now, we're not going to get into the
grammatics of this but what you want to
understand from this statement is that
this is one of the most complete ways to
get a message across. Where you negate
all of the opposites and then you affirm
the message that you're trying to get
across. So here you're negating that
there is no god except for Allah
so that no one has the right to be
worshipped except Allah.
The second thing you want to pay
attention to over here in this component
is the fact that it is very important to
understand what this statement actually
means. So when we say the statement
there is no god but Allah what does the
statement of there is no god but Allah
actually mean? And I've been giving it
away in the way I've been translating it
and that is that there's no one worthy
of worship except Allah.
Why is this significant? Because it is
significant due to the fact that based
upon how you understand the statement
people will enter and exit Islam. People
will enter and exit Islam. So for
example, if we were to now change the
understanding of the statement from
there's no one worthy of worship except
Allah to the statement of there is no
creator except Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala.
There is no creator except Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala. One of the dangerous
ramifications of the statement would now
become that rather than focusing on the
ibadah of Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, what
will make you Muslim is the fact that
you recognize Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
creates and Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
sustains and Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
gives life and death. Based upon this
understanding likes of Firaun would have
been Muslim, the likes of Shaitan would
have been Muslim, and the likes of you
know the vast majority of kuffar would
have been Muslim cuz they recognize that
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala is the only one
that creates and the only he's the only
one that has the attributes of
ar-rububiyyah. So it's very important to
understand the statement is exclusive to
the worship of Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala.
That what enters people into Islam and
takes people outside the fold of Islam
is the exclusive worship of Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala alone.
The third thing related to the statement
of La ilaha illallah is that this
statement has conditions to it. The
statement has conditions to it. One of
the famous tabi'in by the name of Wahb
ibn Munabbih, he said this statement of
La ilaha illallah is the key to Jannah.
And like all other keys, if it does not
have the correct ridges, then it will
not open the door. By the ridges, he's
meaning that if you look at the key,
you'll notice that it has you know a
pointy design on it. These are known as
the ridges. And that is what
differentiates one lock from another
lock. So what he's saying is that if the
key does not have the right ridges, then
it's not going to open up the door to
paradise. So now the question arises,
what are the correct ridges that are
required for this key to open up the
doors to paradise? And this is what the
scholars of Islam call the conditions of
the shahada. This is what the scholars
of Islam call the conditions of the
shahada. Meaning that without these
conditions, the shahada will not be
valid. Without these conditions, the
shahada will not be valid.
Now, where do these conditions actually
come from? These conditions actually
come from the verses of the Quran and
the statements of the messenger of Allah
sallallahu alayhi wasallam himself. What
are these conditions that the scholars
of Islam refer to? They are broken down
to seven, eight, or nine conditions.
Depending on which scholars you ask,
they'll give you seven, eight, or nine
conditions. And for the sake of our
discussion, now that we're having an
extensive discussion on these
conditions, we're going to mention all
nine of these conditions bi idhnillahi
Ta'ala.
One of the famous scholars by the name
of al-Hafiz al-Hakami, by al-Hafiz
al-Hakami. He has a book known as
Ma'arij al-Qubul. He has a book known as
Ma'arij al-Qubul. And he's put according
to him, he believes that there's seven
conditions to the shahada. He's actually
put those terms into a
into abyat, into like you know poetic
verses. He says the conditions of the
shahada being seven are al-ilmu
wal-yaqinu wal-qabul. Wal-inqiyadi fadri
ma wal-inqiyadi fadri ma aqul. As-sidqu
wal-ikhlasu wal-mahabbah wa fakaka
Allahu lima ahabbah. So he says that the
conditions of the shahada are seven. So
for those of you that know Arabic, you
know it's very easy to learn these
abyat, so you'll know the conditions of
the shahada. And I can't overemphasize
this subject enough because Subhana Wa
Ta'ala, how many Muslims do we know that
have no idea that you know there are
conditions to the shahada. That they'll
tell people, you know what? You want to
accept Islam, just say the shahada and
this will make you Muslim. This is not
the case, but rather these conditions
need to be met in order for the shahada
to be valid. Even for our own selves,
you know what is it that is making us
Muslim? It is the statement itself. So
if we don't know what these conditions
are, we may you know perhaps not be
fulfilling the conditions of the
statement which could exit us outside
the fold of Islam and we don't even know
it. So now, let us go through these
conditions bi idhnillahi Ta'ala.
So condition number one is knowledge.
Condition number one is knowledge. So
people have to have knowledge of what
the statement of La ilaha illallah
actually means. So it means that there's
no one worthy of worship except Allah.
That our ultimate goal in worshipping is
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala alone with no
partners with him. And this is a
commandment that Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
gives the messenger of Allah sallallahu
alayhi wasallam in the 47th chapter of
the Quran in verse number 19 where Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala he tells Muhammad
sallallahu alayhi wasallam, "Fa'lam
annahu la ilaha illallah." He says that
no have knowledge of the fact that
there's no one worthy of worship except
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala. Number two is
to have certainty in the statement. It
is to have yaqin. That now that you have
knowledge of the statement, you have to
have yaqin in the statement. And this is
seen in the verse of Surat al-Hujurat,
sura number 49, verse number 15 where
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala he describes the
believers as innamal mu'minuna innamal
mu'minunalladhina amanu billahi wa
rasulihi thumma lam yartabu. That the
believers are only those people that
believe in Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala and
the messenger of Allah sallallahu alayhi
wasallam and then they have no doubt
about it. Meaning that they have yaqin
in the statement. So you have to have
ultimate faith and conviction in the
statement that there's no one worthy of
worship except Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala.
And here's like an interesting test. Um
one of the scholars of Islam uh by the
name of Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahhab,
Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahhab rahimahullah.
You'll notice that the vast majority of
his books, they discuss this concept of
tawhid. All they talk about is this
concept of worshipping Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala alone.
And one day his students started
complaining to him. They started saying,
"Oh Imam or Sheikh, all you talk about
day and night is tawhid. You know, do
you not know anything else to teach us?"
And he just ignores the question and he
starts telling the students that you
know last night there was a man that
sacrificed a chicken chicken to other
than Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala. There was
a man who sacrificed a chicken to other
than Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala.
And the students, he didn't they didn't
think anything of this. They're like,
"Khalas, so what's the big deal? You
know, what's the point?"
Then he goes on and he says a second
point thing about this man. And he says,
"You know this man, he also got married
to his mother. He also get
his mother." Now the students, they
start uproaring. They're like, "You
know, how could this man do this? This
is not befitting. You know, Allah made
this haram. This is you know not
permissible."
And then the Sheikh concludes by telling
them, "This is the exact point. That
when you start realizing that even
sacrificing something like a chicken for
other than the sake of Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala is greater in the sight of Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala than a man getting
married to his mother, that is when I
will stop teaching tawhid. But till that
time comes, I'll continue to teach
this." Now what is the difference over
here? What is the significance? A man
who sacrifices a chicken to other than
the sake of Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala,
he's committed shirk with Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala. He's committed a sin that if
he was to die on that sin, it would exit
it would take him outside the fold of
Islam and he would not be forgiven by
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala. Whereas this
man that got married to his mother, yes,
it's something abhorrent. It is
something disgusting, very foul, very
vile, but at the same time it's a sin
that doesn't take him outside the fold
of Islam. He's just considered sinful in
doing this. And this is the point that
when you have conviction that there's no
one worthy of worship other than Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala, when you see people
committing shirk and committing
blasphemy, it should have the same
effect and greater than if someone was
to tell you that they got married to
their mother or to one of their siblings
or something you know disgusting and
abhorrent like that. The act of shirk is
even more disgusting than that. And this
is the test of certainty. So if you're
actually certain in the statement, you
see how you react to people committing
shirk with Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala. If
it builds that passion and builds that
desire, then alhamdulillah, that
certainty is there. But if the fact that
you know you treat it like an everyday
occurrence where you're completely
desensitized, this starts to become an
indication that the level of certainty
has gone down. That the level of
certainty has gone down.
The third condition of the shahada, the
third condition of the shahada is
al-qabul. That now that you have
knowledge, now that you have certainty,
you have to have acceptance of it. So
you have to accept the statement that
there's no one worthy of worship except
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala. So it's not
something you're going to fight. It's
not something you're going to struggle
with. And the proof for this is Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala telling the
uh people of the past, "That will you
believe in part of the book and reject
part of the book?" Meaning that you have
to accept this statement as a whole,
everything that it comes with. And the
proof for this is in sura number two,
verse number 85. Sura number two, verse
85. Likewise in Surat al-Ahzab, Surat
al-Ahzab verse number 36, Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala he tells us that it is not uh
for the believer man or woman that when
Allah and His messenger have decreed a
matter, that they should have any
opinion in this. But rather we accept
this and we submit to it. We submit to
it.
The fourth condition of the shahada, the
fourth condition of the shahada is
al-inqiyad, submission to Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala. The fourth condition of the
shahada is al-inqiyad, submission and
compliance. So now that you have
knowledge of it, now that you're certain
of it, now that you've accepted of it,
how does an individual act upon the
statement? How does an individual act
upon the statement? The proof for this
is sura number 39, verse 54. Sura number
39, verse 54. Where Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala he says, "And turn in repentance
and obedience with true faith to your
Lord and submit to him a complete
submission. And submit to him a complete
submission." Jazakallahu khair.
So al-inqiyad, this is a second
component that we want to you know
emphasize over here. The importance of
acting according to the statements of
the Shahada.
The manifestation of the Shahada is not
just in terms of, you know, what does
your heart long for? The manifestation
of the Shahada is not just about praying
five times a day. It is about your whole
life reflecting this statement. Your
whole life reflecting the statement. So
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, he tells us in
Surat Al-An'am, telling the messenger of
Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam, "Qul,
inna salati wa nusuki wa mahyaya wa
mamati lillahi rabbil alamin." That say
that my prayer, my rituals, my living
and my dying are for Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala alone. That your whole life, it
becomes a representation of this
Shahada. It becomes a representation of
this Shahada. And this will only take
place once an individual understands the
what the Shahada actually means. So that
you look at the time of the Prophet
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam, the Quraysh,
they used to fight the messenger of
Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam based
statement cuz they understood the
severity of the statement. Likewise,
what changed the Sahaba from being some
of the biggest transgressors to becoming
the best of the generations is
understanding the Sahaba and acting upon
this. So now when you start analyzing
your life, your life as a whole, is it a
manifestation Is it Is it a
representation of this Shahada or is it
or is it a representation and a
manifestation of something else? A
representation and manifestation of
something else.
Number five is Sidq. Being truthful to
the statement. Being truthful to the
statement. As opposed to being dishonest
and being hypocritical. So being
truthful with the statement means that
whenever an individual, you know, falls
short in fulfilling the statement of La
Ilaha Illallah, he's truthful to it. He
recognizes it and he hastens back to
this way of life. He hastens back to
this way of life. And the proof for this
is in Surat Al-Baqarah verses 8 to 10.
The proof for this is in Surat
Al-Baqarah verses 8 to 10.
Number six is Al-Ikhlas. Is Al-Ikhlas.
Having sincerity for the sake of Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala. So someone says the
Shahada not because, you know, they want
to get married to an individual, not
because, you know, they're going to get
some sort of price. And there's there
like interesting stories, Subhan Allah.
Um
How many individuals do we see that
they'll take their Shahada just because
they want to get married to a Muslim
person? And then they'll say their
Shahada, but they have nothing to do
with Islam. You know, unfortunately,
this is the case where the vast majority
of people would take their Shahada for
the sake of getting married, but they'll
have nothing to do with Islam. And
you'll notice that since the Sidq is not
there, since the truthfulness is not
there, then that statement within itself
will have no benefit. And the second
story is Subhan Allah.
I was in Malaysia for the first time in
December 2011. And this was like one of
the scariest moments, you know, Subhan
Allah in my life.
I remember the first time I gave a
khutbah, I was very, very scared. And
there might have been maybe like, you
know, literally about 40 people there.
40 people. And I was panicking. I was
like, "Man, what is wrong with me? I'm
such a coward." And my So much so like,
you know how you see in cartoons where
like the person's knees start to shake
and tremble? I was on the mimbar and my
knees are shaking and trembling, Subhan
Allah. Now, we go forward. This is what?
Like, literally 19 years later or
something like that. We get to this
instance this instance in Malaysia.
The brother says you're giving a khutbah
at the Islamic University of Malaysia of
Kuala Lumpur. I said, "Khalas, you know,
not a big deal. How many people can
there be?"
You know,
you walk into the parking lot, the
parking lot from the beginning of the
parking lot to the masjid is 20 minutes.
That's the walk.
So we start walking. I'm like, "Man,
this is going to be intense."
And then you start walking from the
beginning of the masjid till the first
row. That's like another like a 6-minute
walk.
You climb up the stairs.
Without exaggeration, I think it was 150
stairs to get to the top of the mimbar.
You go up. You say, "Assalamu Alaykum Wa
Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatuh." The Mu'adhin
starts giving the Adhan. And as I sit
down, I start seeing how many people are
actually there.
There were as many people as far as the
eye could see. As far as the eye could
see. We're talking about 15,000 people.
15,000 people.
And I'm just sitting there and I was
like, "Do I still have a chance to run
away? You know, how would [laughter] I
get out of here?"
That's what's going through my mind at
that time. That's what's going through
my mind at that time. Now, that was like
the memorable moment of it, but the more
memorable moment of this was the fact
that we had a Chinese individual take
Shahada. A Chinese individual take
Shahada. Now, for us, that's no big
deal, you know, we will see Chinese
people take Shahada all the time,
inshallah.
For them, it was the first time ever in
the history of the whole university that
a Chinese person was taking Shahada that
today. And I saw something so unique,
Subhan Allah. So this brother, he takes
his Shahada and what does the masjid do?
They took a like a
an empty jar and they said that this
brother took Shahada, he's going to go
through some challenges, we want the
community to support him. So they sent
this jar throughout the masjid and they
raised something like 11,000 ringgit.
That comes out to about $3,000 or
$4,000, something like that. Now, in our
sense again, you know, $4,000 in
Calgary, that might pay your rent for a
month, some groceries, some bills.
That's about it. But 11,000 ringgit, you
know, that's like people's salary over
there. That's like people's salary over
there.
So this individual, Subhan Allah, he's
leaving the masjid and he's like
overjoyed. And then you start hearing
people, you know, they start like
doubting his Iman. They start saying he
only took his Shahada cuz he knew they
were going to raise money. And I
thought, "Subhan Allah, you know,
Muslims are so evil that they started
doubting this person's Shahada just cuz
he had this money with him." And it
shows you the effects of jealousy and,
you know, all those other diseases in
the heart. But the point being that, you
know, Allah knows best what his
situation is. We pray that Allah grants
him Hidayah and keeps him firm upon
Islam.
Um but this shows another concept that
if a person said the Shahada just for
the sake of getting this money, then
obviously that Shahada will do no
benefit to him. And the thing that will
nullify it is his Sidq cuz there is no
sincerity There is no honesty in that
statement. He was doing it just for the
sake of getting that money. Just for the
sake of getting that money and there was
no sincerity in it as well.
The seventh condition is Al-Mahabba. The
seventh condition is the love of this
statement. And it's not only loving this
statement, it's about making sure that
your ultimate love is Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala and his messenger Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam. That your ultimate love
is Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala and the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam. The second component to this
is that loving all of the believers.
Loving all of the believers. So part of
having love for the Shahada is having
love for anyone that has said the
Shahada. Having love for anyone that has
said the Shahada.
And the third and last component to this
love is loving everything that Allah
loves and hating everything that Allah
hates. So all of the good deeds that
Allah loves, we have to love them as
well. And all of the things that Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala hates from the bad
deeds, we have to hate those things as
well. And actually, I didn't give the
proofs for sincerity. The proof for
sincerity was Surah 39 verse number two.
Surah 39 verse number two and Surah 98
verse number five. Surah 98 verse number
five. Then talking about love, the proof
for love is Surah number two verse 165.
Surah number two verse 165. And Surah
number nine verse 24. Surah number nine
verse 24. Now, these are the seven most
common conditions that the scholars of
Islam when they talk about the
conditions of the Shahada, these are the
conditions that they talk about. Who can
give me a recap of these seven
conditions? What are these seven
conditions?
Besides you. Besides you.
What are the seven conditions? Go ahead.
Give me as many as you can.
Al-Ma'rifah. There's no Ma'rifah.
[laughter]
Al-Ilm. Ahsant.
Ahsant.
Al-Qubul.
Right.
Excellent.
Fantastic.
Jazak Allahu Khairan, akhi. Jazak Allahu
Khair. So those are the seven conditions
of the Shahada that we've taken so far.
And you'll notice that the vast majority
of scholars that talk about the
conditions of the Shahada, these are the
seven that they refer to. Now, the two
more that they add onto them. The two
more that some of the scholars add onto
them. Number eight, this is going onto
number eight, is Al-Kufr Bit-Taghut.
Al-Kufr Bit-Taghut. So this is part of
the verse in Surah Surah Al-Baqarah
verse 256. Surah in Surah Al-Baqarah
verse 256 where Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
he says uh that whoever makes Kufr with
the Taghut and believes in Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala, then he's held onto the
firmest of handholds. He's held onto the
firmest of handholds. So Al-Kufr
Bit-Taghut, what does this actually
mean?
Taghut in the Islamic term of using this
is anything that is worshipped besides
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, it needs to be
rejected. It needs to be rejected. So
it's not sufficient that you worship
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, but you need to
worship Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala alone
and you need to reject everything else
besides Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala that is
worshipped.
The ninth condition. The ninth
condition. And that is that a person
should hold onto the statement of La
Ilaha Illallah till the day that they
die. Till the day that they die. And the
proof for this is in Surah number three
verse 102. Surah number three verse 102.
Where Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala says, "Wa
la tamutunna illa wa antum muslimun."
And do not die except in a state of
Islam. Now, these two last ones, number
eight and number nine, Al-Kufr
Bit-Taghut, you know, rejecting anything
else besides Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
that is worshipped and holding onto the
statement till the day that one dies,
The scholars that said that there are
only seven, they responded to these
eight and nine by saying
that these are automatically inferred.
So, when we talk about al-ikhlāṣ,
worshipping Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
alone and being sincere to Allah alone,
it automatically infers that you will do
kufr bi ṭāghūt cuz it's impossible to be
sincere without rejecting all the other
deities that are worshipped. And number
nine, they said that in terms of, you
know, living and keeping this till the
till the end when one dies, they said
this is understood that the shahada is
meant to be for a lifetime. It's not
something that you keep for a short
period of time only. It's not meant for
a short period of time only. Guys, stop
fooling around.
Now we get to the second part of the
statement. Now we get to the second part
of the statement. Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. Now, what are the
key components that needs to be
understood over here? What are the key
components that need to be understood
over here? Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam was sent as the final and last
messenger. So, that's number one. That
after Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam, there are no messengers.
Number two is that the messenger of
Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam taught
us each and every single thing that we
know that is required to be successful
in the hereafter. So, anything that we
need to know in order to attain jannah
and abstain from the hellfire, the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam has taught it to us. So, that
is the second condition. Number three,
the third and last condition is that the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam
uh conveyed the message of Islam
perfectly. He conveyed the message of
Islam perfectly. Meaning that there was
no deficiency in him conveying the
message of Islam. There's no deficiency
in him conveying the message of Islam.
So, now these are the three main pillars
that are required to understand when we
talk about that Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. That Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah. Now, what are these
some of the, I guess, um
detailed points that are are inferred
over here? That when we talk about
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
being the final and last messenger, this
automatically implies that there is a
series of messengers that came before
him. And that likewise, just like you
believe in Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam, you have to believe in the
previous messengers as well. So, a
Muslim that does not believe in Isa
Alaihi Wasallam, a Muslim that doesn't
believe in Musa Alaihi Wasallam, a a
Muslim that doesn't believe in Ibrahim
or Nuh, he will not be a Muslim. This
will take him outside the fold of Islam
because part of believing in Muhammad
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam is in
believing in the prophets and messengers
that came before him. Is believing in
the prophets and messengers that came
before him. Number two is that the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam taught us what we need in order
to be successful. Some of the detailed
points related to this over here is that
the deen of Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala is
complete. That there's nothing that can
be added to the religion
except that it will become harmful to
it. Nothing is added to the religion of
Islam except that it becomes harmful to
it.
Number three,
the fact that the messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam conveyed the
teachings of Islam perfectly. Meaning
that he didn't fall short in teaching
anything that Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
commanded him to teach. What this indeed
is what this necessitates is that just
how the Muslims are in need of the
Quran, they are in need of the Sunnah as
well. And just like how Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala preserved the Quran, he will
preserve the Sunnah because the
teachings of the messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam are there to
explain the teachings of the Quran. The
teachings of the messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam are there to
explain the teachings of the Quran. And
in fact, the Quran is dependent upon the
Sunnah itself because the Sunnah came to
explain the Quran. So, those are the
basic points that you need to know for
regarding that Muhammad Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam is the messenger. Now,
this takes us to the second pillar. This
takes us to the second pillar where the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam, he says that it is to iqāmat
ṣalāh, to establish the prayer.
Establish the prayer. One of the famous
scholars of Islam, Muhammad Rashid Rida,
he says something very very interesting,
Subhana Wa Ta'ala, and it's very very
true. He says, "How many people perform
prayer but fail to establish it? How
many people perform prayer but fail to
establish it?" Now, when you understand
this concept, you'll notice that the
terminology that Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
uses in the Quran and in the Sunnah is
never adā' al-ṣalāh. Is never adā'
al-ṣalāh cuz adā' al-ṣalāh would just
mean to perform the ṣalāh. But the term
that Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala and the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam constantly use is iqāmat ṣalāh.
Is to establish the prayer. So, what
does that actually mean? What does
iqāmat ṣalāh actually mean? Iqāmat ṣalāh
means not only to be physically engaged
in what you are doing, but likewise
emotionally engaged in it as well.
Meaning that when you're praying to
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala, your heart is
attentive to the ṣalāh itself. It has
this element of fear that will this
ṣalāh be accepted for me or not. It has
this element of perfection that Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala is watching me right
now. Am I perfecting the way that I'm
praying to Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala? It
has this element of hope that bi
idhnillahi Ta'ala, Allah will accept
this ṣalāh. It has this element of mercy
that bi idhnillahi Ta'ala, it could be
this very act that, you know, grants me
a higher level in jannah. So, these are
some of the emotions that a person
should be thinking of. These are some of
the emotions that the individual should
be thinking of when he's thinking about
the ṣalāh.
Now, some of the scholars of the past
when they talked about iqāmat ṣalāh,
like if you look into the books of
tafsir, they'll explain this term of,
you know, iqāmat al-ṣalāh. What does
iqāmat al-ṣalāh actually mean? And they
actually mention five things of which
I'll share with you bi idhnillahi
Ta'ala. They said in terms of iqāmat
al-ṣalāh, this means that one must be in
a state of purity. One must be in a
state of purity. In a state of purity
meaning not only physically, but uh
spiritually as well. That he shouldn't
have any hatred or animosity inside of
himself as he's going into ṣalāh. He
shouldn't have any sort of distraction
inside of that ṣalāh. That he needs to
be internally pure as well. Number two
is that it should be done at its
earliest possible time. Number two is
that should it be done at its earliest
possible time.
Number three, they said that the men
should be praying in jama'ah. Number
three, that the men should be praying in
jama'ah. Number four is that the ṣalāh
should be done according to its rulings
and regulations. Number four, that the
ṣalāh should be done according to its
rulings and regulations.
So, for example, let's just say that the
you're praying salat al-zuhr and the
imam doesn't sit for the second See, he
doesn't sit for the first tashahhud. You
know, what is an individual meant to do
at that time? And you'll notice that
this causes a lot of chaos. That
sometimes the imam has stood up and the
congregation wants to force him to go
back into tashahhud. Is this something
that is required or is it something
that's not required? Or should he just
continue the ṣalāh and do sajdah al-sahw
at the end? Now, these sort of detailed
nuances all of us are required to know
cuz at one point or another, we will be
leading the ṣalāh. If we're not leading
the ṣalāh, we'll be praying by ourselves
and it can happen to any of us. So, you
need to know this detailed information
in terms of how to perform your ṣalāh
according to the rulings and
regulations. And then the fifth and last
thing that they mentioned is that the
heart at that time, it should be
attentive. It should be submissive. It
should be attentive. It should be
submissive. It should be humble. It
submissive. And it should be humble. And
it should be calm. And this calmness
should be manifest on the limbs itself.
So, they mention these four attributes
of the heart, the fourth one being the
most important, that the act of calmness
should be manifest on the limbs as well.
That Subhana Wa Ta'ala, you see, you
know, the messenger of Allah Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam in a hadith, he mentions
how some people literally when they
pray, they will be pecking like a crow.
I mean, there's like there is a possible
weakness in this hadith, but Subhana Wa
Ta'ala, this is so true. Like when you
see some people praying, sometimes they
go into sajdah so quickly and they get
up and go back into sajdah, literally it
is like the pecking of a crow. Now,
there's no calmness in that ṣalāh. The
the ṣalāh is meant to be calm. The ṣalāh
is meant to be calm. Now, you know, when
you think about this, if you were to
approximately average the prayers of the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam, salat al-fajr would be half an
hour upwards. Salat al-fajr would
normally be half an hour upwards. If you
look at the narration that talk about
how much Quran he would recite. Zuhr and
Asr, they would be close to 20 minutes.
Zuhr and Asr would be close to 20
minutes. Maghrib, the messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam would keep
relatively short. A lot of the times, he
would recite from the last 14 surahs. A
lot of the times, he would recite from
the last 14 surahs. And then salat
al-isha, likewise, the messenger of
Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam would
keep relatively as short as well. If you
look at a lot of the narrations, they
talk about the messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam reciting, you
know, surat al-tin and surah surah
zalzalah or surat al-layl and surat
al-shams. That these are the surahs the
messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi
Wasallam is reciting in ṣalāh. Now, I
want you to think about Subhana Wa
Ta'ala, we try to implement some of
these sunan.
Imagine what would happen in the masjid.
You know, there's this famous qari
um by the Sheikh by the name of Sheikh
Abdul Rashid Sufi. Um you know,
mashallah tabarak Allah, this man is
blessed. Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala has
blessed him with a beautiful beautiful
voice. And recently, he was in England
uh leading salat al-fajr. Now, I want
you to think about how long his ṣalāh
was. It wasn't 10 minutes long. It
wasn't 20 minutes long. It wasn't 30
minutes long. It wasn't 40 minutes long.
It was 53 minutes long. From the iqama
till the tasleem, 53 minutes long. And I
thought to myself, subhanallah, you
know, at the 8th and 8th musallah,
sometimes if the Imam goes on to like 20
minutes at Fajr time, people start
complaining. I thought to myself,
imagine if, you know, Sheikh Abdul
Rashid Sufi came to the 8th and 8th
musallah and he did 53 minutes. You
know, literally heads would roll after
the salah. There would be like some
blood that would have been shed. You
know, that's what would have happened.
But this was the sunnah of the messenger
of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam,
that you know, that he would elongate
his salah because this is his
conversation with Allah subhana wa
ta'ala. This is him realizing that with
each ruku and each sajdah, his sins are
falling off. So, why wouldn't I want to
prolongate it? He's realizing that this
is the best time for me to supplicate
and make dua to Allah subhana wa ta'ala.
So, why will I not want to elongate it?
This is the closest I will get to
tasting, you know, the akhirah. The
closest I will get to
to tasting the jannah. You know, that is
how he you know, perceived the salah.
That is how he perceived the salah.
The next topic of discussion we'll have
pertaining to the salah is the issue of
abandoning the salah. The issue of
abandoning the salah.
So, when it comes to the issue of
abandoning the salah, there is ijma on
two things. There's consensus on two
matters. Let us understand the consensus
first.
Number one, there is consensus that
anyone that leaves off the salah due to
sleep or forgetfulness or, you know, a
mental instability, he's not accountable
for missing the salah. This does not
count as missing salah. This does not
count as missing salah. There's
consensus on this.
The second consensus, the second
consensus, is that anyone that falls
into the second category that I'm going
to mention right now,
by consensus, he is outside the fold of
Islam. By consensus, he is outside the
fold of Islam. And the scholars
mentioned five types of people over
here. That these five types of people,
by consensus, they're outside the fold
of Islam. So, number one, the one who
says it is not compulsory to pray, he is
outside the fold of Islam.
Number two, the one that refuses to pray
out of pride. The one that refuses to
pray out of pride. He, by consensus, is
outside the fold of Islam.
Number three,
anyone who makes fun of any aspect of
the salah. Anyone who makes fun of any
aspect of the salah, he is outside the
fold of Islam.
Number four,
the one that refuses to pray even when
he's threatened by death. So, when you
look inside the Islamic state, it is the
responsibility of the Islamic state that
when they find out that someone is not
praying, they are to threaten them with
death. They are to threaten them with
death. Now, obviously, you don't apply
this in North America. We're talking
about the Islamic state. But they are to
be threatened with death. And if the
threat of death does not make them pray,
then the scholars have mentioned that by
consensus, this has taken them outside
the fold of Islam. This has taken them
outside the fold of Islam. Then number
five, this is the fifth category and
this is probably, I guess, one of the
more relevant ones of our times, the one
that neglects the prayer altogether. The
one that neglects the prayer altogether.
So, this means that, you know, they're
not praying the five daily prayers,
they're not coming for Jumu'ah, and
they're not even coming for salatul Eid.
You know, at least if they're coming to
salatul Eid, there's some hope bi
idhnillahi ta'ala. But if they're not
even coming for salatul Eid, then
they've completely abandoned the prayer.
And the the scholars said about this
individual that this individual as well
has, by consensus, left the fold of
Islam. This complete abandonment of the
salah. Now, the ikhtilaf of the ulama,
the ikhtilaf of the scholars, it comes
into the third type of person. So, this
will be category number three. We're
finished with the ijma. Now, we look at
what is it that the scholars of Islam
actually differed upon. The scholars of
Islam differed upon the individual who
leaves the salah out of laziness. Who
leaves the salah out of laziness.
The vast majority of scholars on this
issue, they said that the one who leaves
the salah out of laziness, then he has
fallen into a major sin. He has fallen
into a major sin.
And then you will get a handful of
scholars, and this is the opinion also
of the madhhab of Imam Ahmad, that the
one that leaves off the salah out of
laziness,
then he has, in fact, left the fold of
Islam. The one that leaves off the salah
out of laziness, then he has, in fact,
left the fold of Islam. And you find
some fatawa from the from the Hanbali
scholars that, subhanallah, are very,
very strict. That when you when it comes
to these issues, they're very, very
strict. So, you have the fatawa of
Sheikh Abdul Aziz ibn Baz,
ta'ala. And I want you to think about
this. That his fatwa was that an
individual that intentionally does not
set his alarm clock for Fajr, then he's
left the fold of Islam. And subhanallah,
how many people that would apply to?
That you intentionally do not set your
alarm clock for salatul Fajr, and this
has taken you outside the fold of Islam.
Now, obviously, this fatwa is very
strict. This fatwa is very strict. But
it shows you that these are the type of
fatawa that very learned and very
fearful people of Allah subhana wa
ta'ala actually held. So, it shows you
the gravity of missing any one of the
salah. And it shows you the gravity of
any one of the salah. Now, just to quote
something by ibn al-Qayyim, ta'ala, when
he talks about hukm tarikis salah, the
ruling of the one who leaves off the
salah. He says, by consensus of the
ummah, by consensus of the ummah, the
act of leaving off salah is worse than
the act of zina. Is worse than the act
of gambling. Is worse than the act of
riba. And I do not mean doing these acts
individually, but rather even doing them
together, the abandonment of salah is
worse than that. The abandonment of
salah is worse than that. And this is
based upon the hadith of the messenger
of Allah sallallahu alayhi wasallam,
that between a man and disbelief is the
abandonment of the prayer. Between a man
and disbelief is the abandonment of
prayer. And that is why you get one you
see one of the tabi'in, Abdullah ibn
Shaqiq, he says that the sahaba
anhu did not consider anything to be an
act of disbelief except for the
abandonment of salah. That they did not
agree upon any abandoning any act that
it would be an act of disbelief like the
abandonment of the salah. So, you have
to hold on to the salah. And this shows
you that, subhanallah, when we're
talking about the pillars of Islam, not
all of the pillars are equal. But the
shahada is the most important pillar and
then after that is the salah. These are
your two most important pillars one
after another. And then the third pillar
that is mentioned in this hadith is to
give the zakah. Is to give the zakah.
Now, in terms of giving the zakah, if
you were to look in the Qur'an, salah
and zakah are paired how many times? Who
knows this? This is like your trivia
question for today. How many times do
the term salah and zakah come together
in the Qur'an? Anyone know?
57. Who said 57?
You said 57. Very good guess, but that's
not it.
[laughter]
Go ahead in the back. You Do you have
your hand up or you're raising your
hand? No? You're just stretching. Okay,
good. Go ahead. 152. 152.
Okay, I'll give you a hint over here.
You're off by 70. You're off by 70.
So, there's your hint. He's off by 70.
82? 82. And 222? No, it's 82. It's 82.
So, salah and zakah, they're mentioned
together 82 times in the Qur'an. They're
mentioned together 82 times in the
Qur'an.
And you'll notice that when Allah
subhana wa ta'ala is talking about the
disbelievers of the Quraysh,
when he talks about them making tawbah,
what does he tell about it tell us about
them making tawbah? He says, "Wa in tabu
wa aqamu salah wa atu zakah, fa
ikhwanukum fid din." That if they were
to repent, meaning say their shahada, if
they were to establish the prayer and
then also give the zakah, that is when
they become your brothers in faith. That
is when they become your brothers in
faith. So, give this act of zakah is
something that is very, very severe as
well. And that is why Allah subhana wa
ta'ala, he
combines and pairs the act of salah and
zakah together so many times. Now, what
are some of the benefits that we derive?
Like, what are some of the wisdoms that
we see of zakah in this world? What are
some of the benefits we see of zakah in
this world? Number one is that it helps
the poor people in society. So, here the
rich have a responsibility towards the
poor. It helps the poor. Number two, it
strengthens the the bonds of
brotherhood. So, that you see someone
who is extremely poor and you give some
of your wealth to them out of genuine
concern for them, this builds the bonds
of brotherhood. Number three is that a
person realizes that their wealth is a
blessing from Allah subhana wa ta'ala
and they need to keep their wealth
blessed. And if they are not giving
their zakah, that wealth will never be
blessed. That wealth will never be
blessed.
The next point is that zakah is one of
the ways that an Islamic state is
actually built. Zakah is one of the ways
that an Islamic state is actually built.
So, rather than, you know, taxing the
people, one of the ways that the Islamic
state is functioned or, you know, goes
into function is by the institute of
zakah or what we call
So, any money that is left
after the zakah has been distributed,
some of the scholars allowed it to use
to be used for the state as well. And
likewise, when you look at the
categories in terms of whose zakah is
allowed for, you'll notice that it is
the building of an Islamic state is, you
know, included in this general context.
Is included in this general context. And
then the last point is that the giving
of zakah it actually purifies the naf
of the greed and of stinginess and of
other diseases of the heart. So, these
are some of the benefits of giving the
zakat. Now, what are some of the dangers
of not giving zakat? What are some of
the dangers of not giving zakat? We see
three exclusive or three specific
dangers that the messenger of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala alayhi wa sallam
mentions. Number one, he mentions that
those farmers that have animals and
don't give zakat on them, then on the
day of judgement, they will be trampled
by these animals. On the day of
judgement, they will be trampled by
these animals. Number two, the
individual that Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala blessed with wealth and he didn't
give zakat on that wealth, Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala will turn that
wealth into a snake and cause him to be
bit by that snake. Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala will turn that wealth into a
snake and cause him to be bit by that
snake. Number three, is that the ones
who have gold and silver and do not give
zakat on that gold and silver, Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala will cause it to be
melted and then they will be branded
with that, you know, burning hot metal
in the hereafter. They'll be burned by
that burning hot metal in the hereafter.
And there are many other dangers as
well. You know, in other hadith, you
find that the messenger of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala mentions that Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala will hold down the
rain from coming down when people stop
giving their zakat. When people stop
giving their zakat, Allah subhanahu wa
ta'ala will prevent the rain from coming
down and then you can imagine what can
happen. You know, famine starts coming
out in the lands,
you know, the animals are are not taking
care of, the plants aren't growing and
this creates, you know, a whole other
set of problems as well. Now, the ruling
on the one who does not give the zakat.
The ruling on one who does not give the
zakat. So, consensus is on one point
that the one that says zakat is not
compulsory upon me, then he's outside
the fold of Islam. The one that says
zakat is not compulsory upon me is
outside the fold of Islam. However, the
one that does not give zakat
due to laziness or due to stinginess,
then according to the majority of
scholars, he is still inside the fold of
Islam. He is still inside the fold of
Islam. But you see that this is not
something that is agreed upon. Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal rahimahullah, he said
that an individual that does not give
zakat out of stinginess, then this is
taking him outside the fold of Islam.
And he used the example of Abu Bakr radi
Allahu anhu that he fought in the Hurub
al-Ridda. The Hurub al-Ridda were for
those individuals that weren't giving
their zakat. So, here Abu Bakr radi
Allahu anhu fought these people because
they were not giving their zakat.
Because they were not giving their
zakat.
Which brings us to the next pillar of
Islam, which is the Hajj. Which is the
Hajj.
So, the main things you need to know
about Hajj. Hajj is an obligation once
in a lifetime upon every individual.
What are the requirements that are
needed for Hajj to become compulsory?
What are the requirements that are need
to be met for Hajj to be compulsory?
Number one, an individual needs to be
physically fit to go for Hajj. So, the
messenger of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
alayhi wa sallam, he mentions in a
hadith that whoever has a limb that is
broken or whoever is sick and he's in a
state of ihram, then let him delay his
Hajj till the following year. So, he
needs to be physically fit. Number two,
he needs to be financially capable. What
does financially capable mean?
Financially capable means over here that
they should have enough money to go for
Hajj. They should have enough money to
go for Hajj. It doesn't mean that I need
to own a house first, I need to own a
car first, I need to, you know, pay off
my children's,
you know, university tuition. How old
are your kids? Oh, they're not even born
yet. You know, those sort of things
they're not taken into consideration.
You just need to have enough money to go
for Hajj itself. Number three, you
should have the provisions to go for
Hajj. So, back in the day, they need to
take their food and drink with them. If
you didn't have that food and drink, you
were excused from Hajj. But in our day
and age, you know, mashallah, you fly in
the plane and they give you all the food
that you can ask for. Number four, some
of the scholars also mentioned that your
journey to Hajj, it should be presumed
to be safe. It should be presumed to be
safe. So, if an individual thinks that,
you know, he may be robbed or he may be
killed on his way to Hajj due to, you
know, unsafety, he will be excused for
Hajj for that year. But in our times,
you know, subhanallah, again, mentioning
the concept of flying, you're presumably
safe in flying and that is why this
would not be applicable anymore. The
fifth and last one that they mentioned
is that a woman should have a mahram.
The woman should have a mahram. And in
terms of this issue, you'll find that
some of the Shafi'i scholars were quite
flexible with this. They said that
instead of her having a mahram, as long
as she has a trustworthy group, then
this is sufficient for her. Then this is
sufficient for her.
Now, what about delaying Hajj? Are we
allowed to delay Hajj? So, let us look
at this concept. Let us look at this
concept. This whole ikhtilaf, it comes
down to the issue of two issues. Number
one, when was Hajj legislated? And
number two, when did the messenger of
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala alayhi wa
sallam perform Hajj? So, according to
the majority of scholars, Hajj was
legislated in the sixth year of the
Hijrah.
And then according to the minority, it
was legislated in the 10th year of the
Hijrah. Now, by consensus, the messenger
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala, he
performed Hajj in the 10th year. So,
now, if Hajj was legislated in the sixth
year and he only did it in the 10th,
then this shows that an individual is
allowed to delay his Hajj. But for those
that said, "No, Hajj was legislated in
the 10th year." And Imam ash-Shawkani
rahimahullah, you know, supports this
opinion very, very strongly that Hajj
was legislated in this 10th in the 10th
year and thus the messenger of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala alayhi wa sallam did
not delay in performing it. Then they
said that no, it is not allowed. A
second point in understanding this is
actually a matter of usul al-fiqh. It's
not a matter a matter of text and dates.
And that is when a command is given,
does that command necessitate acting on
that command right away or are you
allowed to delay it? Are you allowed to
delay it? So, to give a simple example,
you know, we have quite a few young
people here. Your dad tells you, you
know, go and throw out the garbage. Go
and throw out the garbage. He's given
this command. When does your dad expect
you to do this? Does he expect you to do
it now or is it expected that, you know,
any time of your choosing and liking can
you do this? So, the minority of
scholars, they said, "No, as long as you
fulfill the command, the time is
irrelevant." But the majority of
scholars, they said, "No. In fact, when
the command is given, yaqtadi al-fawr,
that it necessitates that it is done
right away." And based upon this
principle in usul al-fiqh, this is why
you see the madhhab of Imam Abu Hanifah,
the madhhab of Imam Malik, the madhhab
of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal rahimahullah,
they said that when an individual meets
these criterion for Hajj, he has to do
it right away. He has to do it right
away. And the madhhab of Imam
ash-Shafi'i, some of the scholars said
it has to be done right away, but the
official stance of the Shafi'i madhhab
was that you are allowed to delay your
Hajj. You're allowed to delay your Hajj.
Now, what's interesting over here is the
attitude of the predecessors. During the
time of Umar ibn al-Khattab radi Allahu
anhu, he said, "I feel like sending
people out to go and see the people. Who
of them were able to go for Hajj and did
not go for Hajj?" He wants He says, "I
want to send people out to go and test
the people to see who was able to go for
Hajj and did not go for Hajj. And the
ones that did not go for Hajj, I want to
apply the jizya to them. I want to apply
the jizya to them." And this is a tax
that is given to the to the
non-believers that are living under the
protection of the Muslim state. So, he
is indirectly saying that this is
something that would take him them
outside the fold of Islam. Now,
according to the majority of scholars,
the delaying of Hajj is not something
that would take you outside the fold of
Islam, but rather it is the act of
denying Hajj that would take the
individual outside the fold of Islam.
Then the last section is on the the
sawm. It's on fasting in the month of
Ramadan. Now, this is something that in
sha'a Allah ta'ala, starting from next
week, you guys are going to study in
immense detail. Because starting from
next week, Sheikh Hassan is taking over
and he's doing his Ramadan workshop for
the next four weeks in sha'a Allah
ta'ala. So, the key things that you need
to know about about fasting in the
Ramadan is that it is an obligation upon
each and every Muslim until he is no
longer able to fast. Until he is no
longer able to fast. So, for some
people, this may mean until they die.
For other people, and this is the vast
majority of people, where they get
really, really old. Where they're no
longer able to fast and then in that
situation, they feed a poor person for
each day. They feed a poor person for
each day. And in sha'a Allah ta'ala,
we're not going to go into detail over
here because I don't want to take away
from Sheikh Hassan's teaching. But the
last point I will conclude with. The
last point I will conclude with is that
in one of the variations of this hadith,
one of the tabi'in, he asks Abdullah ibn
Umar radi Allahu anhu radi Allahu
anhuma, "And what about jihad? Is jihad
one of the pillars of Islam?" And then
Abdullah ibn Umar radi Allahu anhuma, he
responds by saying, "No, the messenger
of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala alayhi wa
sallam did not mention the pillar of
jihad. He did not mention the pillar of
jihad." And this is something that is,
you know, common in some of the books
that when they talk about the pillars of
Islam, they mention six pillars, the
sixth one being jihad. But Abdullah ibn
Umar radi Allahu anhuma, he makes it
very, very clear that it is not one of
the pillars of Islam. That it is not one
of the pillars of Islam. And al-Hafiz
ibn Rajab rahimahullah, he comments on
the wisdom behind this and he says, "The
reason that is the reason that is is
because the act of jihad is something
that will not always be relevant
throughout time. It is not something
that will always be relevant throughout
time. Whereas these five pillars, from
the beginning of Islam till the end of
time, they will be compulsory upon each
and every individual. Whereas, when it
comes to Jihad, then there are certain
conditions that need to be met and you
know, are required before that act takes
place. And that is why he says that it
was not mentioned under the pillars of
Islam, and Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala knows
best. Now, I know that was a very
intense halaqah. I told you guys from
the beginning that if you weren't
writing this down, you weren't going to
remember it. And I can guarantee that
the vast majority of people, myself
included in this, that if we were to ask
to repeat this, we more than likely will
not. So, here's a piece of advice that
alhamdulillah, we live in an age of
technology. This is being recorded, it's
going to be up live on YouTube. When you
go home, bidhnillah Ta'ala, revisit this
halaqah, revise your notes, write down
some notes, because this is the very
fundamentals of your deen. Like this one
hadith, it compromises your whole entire
Islam. And if you have any deficiency in
understanding this, then it could be
something very dangerous. So, make sure
you know the conditions of the shahada.
Make sure you know what is what it meant
by when we talk about iqamat salah. Make
sure you know the dangers of abandoning
the salah. Make sure you know, you know,
what is meant by giving the zakat, the
dangers of giving off of not giving
zakat, and so on and so forth. And
bidhnillah Ta'ala, Imam Nawawi's 40
hadith, bidhnillah Ta'ala, will continue
after Ramadan. We will continue after
Ramadan. Bidhnillah Ta'ala, we will
conclude with that. Wa sallallahu alayhi
wa sallam wa barak alayhi wa nabiyna
Muhammad wa alayhi wa alihi wa sahbihi
wa sallam. And I'll take three
questions, bidhnillah Ta'ala.
Masha'Allah, we have more than three.
So, let's start from over here. Go
ahead.
Excellent. Very good question. So, over
here, we need to look at two elements.
Number one is what is called ta'lif
al-qulub, which is like winning the
hearts of people to soften their hearts
towards Islam. And number two, where the
person, you know, is disingenuous in his
shahada. That literally, I'm only going
to say my shahada because you're
building uh, you know, a water well for
us. So, over here, I would say that the
vast majority of people, they would fall
under ta'lif al-qulub. That because we
show an act of mercy, they'll genuinely,
you know, accept Islam. And then the
proof for this is that you follow up in
their action. You know, do these people
actually start praying? Do they start
fasting? If they start doing that, then
they show that they're genuine. However,
if they only said the shahada, if
they've taken the water, and you don't
see them again till the next time you're
distributing water, then it shows you
that they were, you know, disingenuous
with their shahada. And Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala knows best. Okay, my second
question, you said the person
uh,
with concerns to say that the person is
not held accountable due to sleep
or forgetful or something.
Or a mental illness, yeah.
so what what does that mean if somebody
slept through Fajr? Like, you know, on
So, for example, you put your alarm
clock on, and you're just extremely
tired that, you know, you
unintentionally hit the snooze button
and you didn't wake up. So, that
individual, he will pray Fajr when he
wakes up, and insha'Allah, he's not
sinful for that. Now, this is something
to keep in mind when this hadith is
mentioned, you'll notice that this is
like the normal state for a vast
majority of us. That the alarm clock
goes off, the natural reaction, we've
programmed ourselves, we will hit the
snooze button, right? And then we end up
missing salah or whatever happens, you
know, that's between us and Allah
Subhana Wa Ta'ala. But the point over
here being is that this hadith was
mentioned at a time when there was no
snooze button, right? There was no
snooze button. So, you heard the um
What's it called when the rooster gives
us a
the crowing of the the rooster? What
does a rooster do?
We have also a term for that. What's the
proper term for that, Hamza?
Any idea?
The sound that a rooster makes, what is
that called?
Crow.
No, there's another word for it.
Anyways, you guys understand what I'm
talking about. So, there was no alarm
clock, you had that going off. So, an
individual that hears that, especially,
you know, it doesn't stop, it continues
for like 25 minutes. So, that time you
wake up and you have to pray at that
time. You can't just ignore it, right?
So, this is the point that's being
mentioned that if you're you're
habitually and constantly snoozing your
alarm clock, this hadith doesn't apply
to you. This applies to the individual
that, you know, he's struggling to wake
up to salah, and if he fails in one of
those struggles, insha'Allah, he's
excused. It's not that on a regular
basis, you're missing salah every day.
And Allah knows best. Is this a sahih
hadith? Like, can you mention the hadith
number and like
Is what a sahih hadith?
The like you're mentioning that if
someone doesn't say his prayer,
he's out of Islam.
Uh, there's many, many ahadith about
this. There's many, many ahadith also.
The thing like like the alarm thing and
No, but there was no alarm clocks at the
time of the Prophet Sallallahu Alayhi Wa
Sallam. So, these are in terms of
understanding the general concepts. So,
an individual, when you understand the
principles of Islam, even though they
didn't exist at the time of the Prophet
Sallallahu Alayhi Wa Sallam, you can
derive lessons based upon those
principles.
That's what I'm saying. Go ahead. Uh,
when you mentioned about
rather, when you're talking about zakat,
you mentioned um a point about how like
after all all the needy people have been
given zakat, Yeah.
any amount left, Yeah. then that zakat
is can be used to fund the Muslim state.
So, during the time of Umar ibn
al-Khattab radiyallahu anhu, there was
no need for, you know,
uh
zakat anymore, because everyone how was
taken care of and they had their wealth.
So, during the time of Umar ibn
al-Khattab, they started doing a whole
bunch of expansion projects, things like
the building of hospitals, things like,
you know, supporting madrasas and things
like things like that. It became the
responsibility of the state to fund
those projects because there was so much
wealth. Now, the primary
uh usage of zakat should only be for
taking care of those, you know, eight uh
eight categories that are mentioned in
Surat al-Tawbah. Now, outside of those
eight categories, you shouldn't be using
zakat for anything else. However, when
there's a surplus of zakat, then there's
a bit more flexibility. So, that's what
I was referring to. And but actually, my
question was who actually So, basically,
kind of uh that would I don't know if
that can happen in the modern time, but
if that were to happen,
who would be determining the its usage?
The khalifa itself. So, once there's a a
leader for the Muslim state, he is the
one who would make that decision.
Who is next? Go ahead. Uh,
when you go to prolong your Islamic
prayer longer, there's this hadith of
Allah that once a man came and
complained about his Imam. He said the
Imam makes the salah too long.
Right. And he he didn't want to pray
with him. So, the Prophet Sallallahu
Alayhi Wa Sallam, he said the Imam
should not make the salah long for the
people. So, how would you reconcile
this? Uh, the
Prophet Sallallahu Alayhi Wa Sallam,
when he used to make the salah
Fantastic. So, in this hadith, a man
came complaining about Mu'adh ibn Jabal
that he would elongate his salah too
long. And the salah that Mu'adh ibn
Jabal used to pray with his people was
salat al-isha. He used to pray salah.
So, Mu'adh ibn Jabal, he used to pray
isha with the Messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alayhi Wa Sallam, then he
would go back to his village and pray
salat al-isha with them. And he would
elongate the salah. So, one day, a man
from this village, he comes to the
Messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alayhi Wa
Sallam and he says that Mu'adh is
leading the salah too long. You know,
he's becoming a fitnah for the people.
So, Mu'adh ibn Jabal is told by the
Messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alayhi Wa
Sallam, "Do you want to become a fitnah
for the people? Rather, shorten the
salah of isha for them. Shorten the
salah of isha for them." So, there are
certain salahs that should be prolonged,
and there are certain salahs that should
be shortened. So, for example, the
general case scenario, like I mentioned,
Fajr should be long, Dhuhr and Asr
should be moderate, Maghrib and Isha
should be short. Now, I want you to look
at the wisdom behind this. Fajr is long
because it's the beginning of your day,
you have the most amount of energy, you
just woken up from your sleep. Dhuhr and
Asr are in the middle of your day, so
they're moderate, you have other things
to do, you don't prolong it too long.
Maghrib and Isha, your day is coming to
an end, and you don't want to make it a
fitnah for the people. That in their
salah, they're falling asleep, you don't
want to that to happen. So, that is why
those two short salahs in particular are
shortened, whereas the regular the other
salawat are elongated and, you know,
moderate in their proportion. But in
that hadith of the Prophet Sallallahu
Alayhi Wa Sallam, did he mention
saying that it's excusable for sleeping?
The in the people, they might be
elderly,
somebody who
who had something very I think it's in
general for all the
Ahsant. That's a very good point as
well. But again, we've mentioned the
general principle, and then those are
the exceptions. So, for example, even in
salat al-fajr, if the Messenger of Allah
Sallallahu Alayhi Wa Sallam heard a baby
crying or he saw someone weak and frail,
he would make his salat al-fajr short.
So, those are the exceptions to the
rule, and that is like the
responsibility of the Imam to look after
and be considerate of his people,
knowing what can they handle and what
can they can't if they can't handle. So,
if there's a baby that is crying or he
sees someone's weak and old inside of
the salah, then the Imam should shorten
the salah. But the general case scenario
is that is how the salawat should be
prayed, and Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
knows best.
So, one thing, the first one is
uh what's the difference between Can you
elaborate on the difference between sidq
and ikhlas
and the conditions of the shahada? Okay.
So, ikhlas meaning that it should be
only for the sake of Allah Subhana Wa
Ta'ala. So, you say the statement only
for the sake of Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala.
Sidq means that you're truthful to the
statement. That you try your utmost best
to live by this statement, right? So, if
an individual falters,
a sign of sidq is that he returns to it.
Whereas, ikhlas is who are you doing
this action for, right? Who are you
seeking your reward from? So, those are
the two uh key differences between the
two.
And the second thing is that you said
that
uh the consensus about the person who
abandons salah completely,
does that fall out of Islam? Yes. And
then you proceeded to say that
that person who leaves salah due to
laziness,
uh vast majority of scholars
said that he doesn't leave the fold of
Islam. So, can you elaborate on that?
Sorry, what did I say? I So, just so I
can correct myself. You said that Yeah.
whoever abandons salah completely, he
doesn't go to eat. Yes. And that's
consensus. Exactly.
And that's the fold of Islam. Right. But
the person and then you can continue to
say that a person who leaves the Salat
of laziness, the majority have said that
he is inside the fold of Islam. Okay,
exactly. So, what is the difference
between complete abandonment and leaving
Salat of laziness? That's your question.
Fantastic. So, they said that the one
who leaves out of Salat of laziness,
this is the individual that when he's
reminded to pray, he will pray.
That is the difference. So, for example,
you know, a person comes to the masjid,
Salat is going on, regardless of your
level of Iman,
you will pray with the Jama'ah. Whereas
an individual that has abandoned the
Salat, you know, he comes to the masjid,
he picks up his Zakat money, let's just
say, the Salat is going on, he's walking
out of the masjid. This is an individual
that's, you know, neglected the Salat
completely. And Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala
knows best.
Who is next?
Go ahead. Um I have a question that what
is the opinion of the scholars on
performing Hajj once because
Prophet Muhammad he only performed
Hajj only once in his lifetime. Right.
So, the first time is compulsory. Doing
Hajj once is compulsory. If you do it
more than that, then it is virtuous for
you, but it is not but it is not
compulsory to do Hajj more than once.
Make sense?
Last Actually, last two questions. Go
ahead. Out of the five pillars in an
Islamic state,
which one would be kind of legitimate
from the state?
Explain your question. I didn't
understand. Out of the five pillars in
an Islamic state, Yeah. which one out of
these five can be enforced by the state?
So, all of these pillars are meant to be
enforced by the state. When you when you
live in an Islamic state, the ruler is
responsible for the implementation of
these pillars. So, we see people that
are not praying, he is responsible for
them to make sure that they pray. If
they're not giving Zakat, he's
responsible to make sure that they give
their Zakat. And if they're not fasting
and going for Hajj, then he's
responsible for that as well.
Which one is
the last one?
Excuse me? Sorry, what What you
determine the fasting
So, by determining the fasting, it's
like you take the precautionary
measures. So, people are not allowed
running restaurants during the daytime
of Ramadan. And likewise, you know, the
baking of foods, they would only start
closer to Iftar time. And those sort of
things. Now, though, you know,
particularly with fasting, you can't
test a person, you know, except that you
will trust them, right? You're not going
to go around smelling everyone's breath,
you know,
are they fasting or not? So, you just
take the precautionary measures to make
sure that is the case to the best of
your ability. And likewise, if you see
someone eating in the month of Ramadan
publicly, then obviously it is up to the
the Muslim judge at that time, maybe
make an example of him if he wants,
right? So, those sort of things might be
implemented. And Allah knows best.
And last question. Go ahead. To what
kind of people
To what kind of people do we give Zakat?
Inshallah, we will
be discussing this in the month of
Ramadan when we talk about giving Zakat.
But just to give you
a brief breakdown, in Surat Taubah,
Allah Subhana Wa Ta'ala mentions eight
categories of people that Zakat is due
to, right? So, he talks about the Fuqara
and the Masakin. So, the Fuqara, those
who have nothing. The Masakin, those
that have a little bit, but not enough
to survive. Those that have a little
bit, but not enough to survive. Then,
those people that give the Zakat. So,
those people that are giving the Zakat,
that they distribute the Zakat, they're
eligible to take some of the Zakat as
well. Then, number four, it is to soften
the hearts of the people, to soften the
hearts of the people. So, someone's
interested in Islam, if you feel like
giving him a gift will soften his heart
towards Islam, Zakat money can be used
for that. Then, number five, the one who
is like a Muslim prisoner. So, if you
have a Muslim that is imprisoned, you
can use Zakat money to free that Muslim
captive as well. Is that four or five or
six?
Four. Probably lost count. Let's count
again. So, Fuqara, Masakin, the ones who
are giving Zakat, to soften the people's
hearts, and those who are captives.
Then, you have
Fi Sabilillah. Fi Sabilillah over here
means that you support the Muslim army.
You support the Muslim army. That's
number six.
Number seven,
The traveler and then number eight.
Right, the traveler. And then number
eight.
And those who are in debt. The travelers
and those who are in debt. So, those are
the eight categories that Allah Subhana
Wa Ta'ala mentions in Surat Taubah who
are eligible for Zakat.
So, are you trying to give them Dawah?
Well, like if you want to give them
Zakat money. No. So, the general usage
for Zakat is for the Muslims. However,
if you're interested in giving this
person Dawah, then you can use Zakat
money to soften their hearts towards
Islam. But a second case in there, let's
just say you're not finding Muslims that
you can give Zakat to, then the scholars
have said that in that case, then even
the non-Muslims, we would give them the
Zakat money. We would give them the
Zakat money. All right. On on fasting,
if you can't if you're not able to fast,
what do you want to
So, why aren't you able to fast? What's
the reason behind that? How do you
like
you get sick or something?
So, an individual in terms of sickness,
he has to have a terminal sickness. What
this means is that he's not going to get
better after this point. So, in that
situation, he would feed one person for
each day. So, normally, whatever he
would eat, you know, as a meal, he would
donate that meal to someone else. And
that's what he would do. Ta'ala. Make
sense? Unless we'll conclude with that.